Updated lite client spec (#3841)
tendermint/tendermint: docs/spec/consensus/light-client.md

# Lite client

A lite client is a process that connects to Tendermint full nodes and then tries to verify application data using the Merkle proofs.

> We assume that the lite client knows a (base) header *inithead* it trusts (by social consensus or because the lite client has decided to trust the header before). Now the goal is to check whether another header *newhead* can be trusted based on the data in *inithead*.

Reviewer: Possibly worth clarifying what it means to trust a header in this context - are we referring to trusting some subset of the validator public keys in the header?

Author: That is true. For the next version, I added a comment  that this is an underlying assumption that the user has to make sure is justified.

## Definitions

In the following I only give the details of the data structures needed for this specification.

  * header fields
    - *height*
    - *bfttime*: the chain time when the header (block) was generated
    - *V*: validator set containing validators.
    - *NextV*: validator set for next block.

>     - *commit*: evidence that block with height *height* - 1 was committed by a set of validators (canonic commit). We will use ```signers(commit)``` to refer to the set of validators that committed the block.

Reviewer: canonical commit?

Author: changed that.

  * signed header fields: contains a header and a  *commit* for the current header; a "seen commit". In the Tendermint blockchain the "canonic commit" is stored in header *height* + 1.

* For the purpose of this lite client specification, we assume that the Tendermint Full Node exposes the following function over Tendermint RPC:
```go
    func Commit(height int64) (SignedHeader, error)
      // returns signed header: header (with the fields from
      // above) with Commit that include signatures of
      // validators that signed the header

    type SignedHeader struct {
      Header        Header
      Commit        Commit
    }
```

  * *tp*: trusting period   

>   * for realtime *t*, the predicate *correct(v,t)* is true if the validator *v*

Author: The write-up was not clear. Each bullet is supposed to be a definition we are using. Some of which actually are data structures (for which I only give the details we are using). I will clean this up. Thanks for spotting this!

    follows the protocol until time *t* (we will see about recovery later).

>     Similarly we define *faulty(v,t)*.

Author: I guess I was trying to keep an option open for a more dynamic failure model with recovery. But you are right, this is not so clear at the moment. Given that we do not really use faulty(v,t) I will remove that.

  * For each header *h* it has locally stored, the lite client stores whether
    it trusts *h*. We write *trust(h) = true*, if this is the case.
  * Validator fields. We will write a validator as a tuple *(v,p)* such that
    + *v* is the identifier (we assume identifiers are unique in each validator set)
    + *p* is its voting power

### Tendermint Failure Model

> If a block *h* is generated at time *bfttime* (and this time is stored in the block), then validators that are correct until time *h.Header.bfttime + tp* have more than two thirds of the voting power in *h.Header.V*.

Author: I do not require the *v* to stay in the validators. But they indeed need to be correct, that is, stop signing if they are not validators anymore. I suspect there is something to clarify about the relationship of tp and the unbonding period here?

> If a block *h* is generated at time *bfttime* (and this time is stored in the block), then validators that are correct until time *h.Header.bfttime + tp* have more than two thirds of the voting power in *h.Header.V*.

Author: ... and I rephreased it similar to Ethan's suggestion for the next version.

Formally,
\[

> \sum_{(v,p) \in h.Header.NextV \wedge correct(v,h.Header.bfttime + tp)} p >

Author: To the best of my understanding it should be NextV also in the text above. I believe the proper definition is that the trusting period starts the moment a validator set is decided on in NextV.

2/3 \sum_{(v,p) \in h.Header.NextV} p
\]

*Assumption*: "correct" and "faulty" are defined w.r.t. realtime (some Newtonian global notion of time, i.e., wall time), while *bfttime* corresponds to the reading of the local clock of a validator (how this time is computed may change when the Tendermint consensus is modified). In this note, we assume that all clocks are synchronized to realtime. We can make this more precise eventually (incorporating clock drift, accuracy, precision, etc.). Right now, we consider this assumption sufficient, as clock synchronization (under NTP) is in the order of milliseconds and *tp* is in the order of weeks.  

> *Remark*: This failure model might change to a hybrid version that takes heights into account in the future.

Author: We discussed this last week, when you were not there. Adding a height-based trusting period on-chain seems to be simple. 
Off-chain, for the lite client, it is less clear. If a lite client trusts a header with height h, and it wants to check a header with height h+k, the lite client must figure out what is the current height on the chain. If the height on the chain has exceeded h + tp_h, the validators that signed at height h are not trusted anymore, and could have forged an arbitrary header with height h+k in the meantime, without violating a height-based Tendermint failure model.

> *Remark*: This failure model might change to a hybrid version that takes heights into account in the future.

Reviewer: Right; the only local reference the light client has is a local clock, so some synchrony assumptions on time are unavoidable.

I still think it's prudent to make the unbonding period a minimum of time & height though, it should give us a somewhat stronger property about when evidence would be valid.

> The specification in this document considers an implementation of the lite client under this assumption. Issues like *counter-factual signing* and *fork accountability* and *evidence submission* are mechanisms to enforce this assumption, that is, incentivize validators to follow the protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The specification in this document considers an implementation of the lite client under this assumption. Issues like *counter-factual signing* and *fork accountability* and *evidence submission* are mechanisms to justify this assumption by incentivizing validators to follow the protocol.
```

If they don't, and we have more that 1/3 faults, safety may be violated. Our approach then is to *detect* these cases (after the fact), and take suitable repair actions (automatic and social). This is discussed in an upcoming document on "Fork accountability". (These safety violations include the lite client wrongly trusting a header, a fork in the blockchain, etc.)

## Lite Client Trusting Spec

The lite client communicates with a full node and learns new headers. The goal is to locally decide whether to trust a header. Our implementation needs to ensure the following two properties:

> - Lite Client Completeness: If header *h* was correctly generated by the Tendermint blockchain (and its age is less than the trusting period), then the lite client should eventually set *trust(h)* to true.

Reviewer: I think "instance of Tendermint consensus" is a bit clearer than "blockchain"; there doesn't actually need to be a blockchain I believe.

Author: I changed that throughout the text for the next version

- Lite Client Accuracy:  If header *h* was *not generated* by the Tendermint blockchain, then the lite client should never set *trust(h)* to true.

> *Remark*: If in the course of the computation, the lite client obtains certainty that some headers were forged by adversaries, it may submit (a subset of) the headers it has seen as evidence of misbehavior.

Reviewer: "forged" is unclear in this context; what is the difference between forging a header and signing one normally?

Author: I will add a clarification

*Remark*: In Completeness we use "eventually", while in practice *trust(h)* should be set to true before *h.Header.bfttime + tp*. If not, the block cannot be trusted because it is too old.

> *Assumption*: Initially, the lite client has a header *inithead* that it trusts correctly, that is, *inithead* was correctly generated by the Tendermint blockchain.

Reviewer: Same comment on "Tendermint blockchain"

To reason about the correctness, we may prove the following invariant.

*Lite Client Invariant.*
 For each lite client *l* and each header *h*:
if *l* has set *trust(h) = true*,
  then validators that are correct until time *h.Header.bfttime + tp* have more than two thirds of the voting power in *h.Header.NextV*.

>   Formally,

Author: Yes, the expression is the same. The difference is that here the precondition is that the lite client trusts the header, while before we talk about generating the header. I will try to emphasize this in the write-up.

  \[
  \sum_{(v,p) \in h.Header.NextV \wedge correct(v,h.Header.bfttime + tp)} p >
  2/3 \sum_{(v,p) \in h.Header.NextV} p
  \]

  Equivalently,
  \[
  \sum_{(v,p) \in h.Header.NextV \wedge faulty(v,h.Header.bfttime + tp)} p <
  1/3 \sum_{(v,p) \in h.Header.NextV} p
  \]

## High Level Solution

Upon initialization, the lite client is given a header *inithead* it trusts (by
social consensus). It is assumed that *inithead* satisfies the lite client invariant. (If *inithead* has been correctly generated by the Tendermint blockchain, the invariant follows from the Tendermint Failure Model.)

When a lite clients sees a signed new header *snh*, it has to decide whether to trust the new
header. Trust can be obtained by (possibly) the combination of three methods.

1. **Uninterrupted sequence of proof.** If a block is appended to the chain, where the last block
is trusted (and properly committed by the old validator set in the next block),
and the new block contains a new validator set, the new block is trusted if the lite client knows all headers in the prefix.

> Intuitively, a trusted validator set is assumed to not chose a new validator set

Reviewer: the double negative here is confusing, and what is the "Tendermint Failure Model"?

I think we mean that we assume a trusted validator set will choose only a new validator set for which we can make the same 2/3 protocol-following assumption.

Author: double negation is a Germanic disease ;-)  I will fix that

that violates the Tendermint Failure Model.

2. **Trusting period.** Based on a trusted block *h*, and the lite client

> invariant, which ensures the fault assumption during the trusting period, we can check whether at least one  validator, that has been continuously correct from *h.Header.bfttime* until now, has signed *snh*.

Author: No, I am saying that I need one signature by a *correct* validator. This is checked by having signatures from more than 1/3 of the voting power. As long as we are within the Tendermint Failure Model, we do not have to revert. If the Tendermint Failure Model is violated, we will have to deal with forks and recover a good state.

> invariant, which ensures the fault assumption during the trusting period, we can check whether at least one  validator, that has been continuously correct from *h.Header.bfttime* until now, has signed *snh*.

Author: Also, by setting the trustlevel parameter to a value greater than 1/3 we can require signatures by validators with more voting power than 1/3.

> invariant, which ensures the fault assumption during the trusting period, we can check whether at least one  validator, that has been continuously correct from *h.Header.bfttime* until now, has signed *snh*.

Reviewer 2: Got it, thanks!

  * However, it does not know which header(s) is/are the problematic one(s).
  * In this case, the lite client can submit (some of) the headers it has seen as evidence. As the lite client communicates with one full node only when executing Bisection, it is safe to assume that this full node is faulty.
- the lite client must retry to retrieve correct headers from another full node
  * it picks a new full node
  * it restarts *Bisection*
  * there might be optimizations; a lite client may not need to call *Commit(k)*, for a height *k* for which it already has a signed header it trusts.

**Auxiliary Functions.** We will use the  function ```votingpower_in(V1,V2)``` to compute the voting power the validators in set V1 have according to their voting power in set V2;
 ```votingpower_in(V,V)``` returns the total voting power in V.
We further use the function ```signers(Commit)``` that returns the set of validators that signed the Commit.

**CheckSupport.** The following function checks whether we can trust the header h2 based on header h1 following the trusting period method.

```go
  func CheckSupport(h1,h2,trustlevel) bool {

>     if h1.Header.bfttime + unbonding_period < now { // Observation 1

Author: should be tp. yes.

      return false // old header was once trusted but it is expired
    }  
    vp_all := votingpower_in(h1.Header.NextV,h1.Header.NextV)
      // total sum of voting power in h1

    if h2.Header.height == h1.Header.height + 1 {
      // specific check for adjacent headers; everything must be
      // properly signed.
      // Plus the following check that 2/3 of the voting power

>       // in h1 signed h2

Author: Yes. I guess there are some hashes, etc., that should be checked. I am not sure I know all the details what needs to be checked here. Are you saying that we should add the check "h2.Header.V == h1.Header.NextV"? Is this all?

**Bisection.** The following function uses CheckSupport in a recursion to find intermediate headers that allow to establish a sequence of trust.

```go
func Bisection(h1,h2,trustlevel) bool{
  if CheckSupport(h1,h2,trustlevel) {
    return true
  }
  if h2.Header.height == h1.Header.height + 1 {
    // we have adjacent headers that are not matching (failed
    // the CheckSupport)
    // we could submit evidence here
    return false
  }
  pivot := (h1.Header.height + h2.Header.height) / 2
  hp := Commit(pivot)
    // ask a full node for header of height pivot
  Store(hp)  
    // store header hp locally
  return (Bisection(h1,hp,trustlevel) && Bisection(hp,h2,trustlevel))
}
```  

*Correctness arguments (sketch)*

Lite Client Accuracy:
- Assume by contradiction that *h2* was not generated correctly and the lite client sets trust to true because Bisection returns true.
- Bisection returns true only if all calls to CheckSupport in the recursion return true.
- Thus we have a sequence of headers that all satisfied the CheckSupport
- again a contradiction

Lite Client Completeness:

> This is only ensured if upon *Commit(pivot)* the lite client is always provided with a correctly generated header.

Reviewer 2: what if we fail to verify that commit was signed by 2/3 of initial validators? I.e.

```
votingpower_in(signers(header.Commit), h1.Header.NextV) < 2/3
```

Do we simply abort?

Author: The functions will return false. As I mentioned in one remark, in this case we have encountered a forged header, and can submit evidence. We are currently preparing a spec on fork accountability that will discuss these cases.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, that is what I thought, but in the pseudo code it looks like Commit always gets correct commit.

After we submit evidence, do we try another full node?

Author: Yes. I mentioned that further above in the text following "the lite client must retry to retrieve correct headers from another full node". Should we specify that in more detail?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is only ensured if upon *Commit(pivot)* the lite client is always provided with a correctly generated header.
```

# Lite client

A lite client is a process that connects to Tendermint full nodes and then tries to verify application data using the Merkle proofs.

## Context of this document

In order to make sure that full nodes have the incentive to follow the protocol, we have to address the following three Issues

1) The lite clients needs a method to verify header it obtains from full nodes -- addressed in this document)
2) Detect conflicts/forged headers -- when the verification method of this document fails, then a conflict is detected. However, this document does not address to do this in an efficient way, or with special attacks in mind. This will be treated in fork accountability.

> 3) How can evidence for conflicts be reported, and to whom.

Author: No. The plan is to have a third document for that, and eventually merge the spefications 1-3 to have the complete picture.

## Problem statement

We assume that the lite client knows a (base) header *inithead* it trusts (by social consensus or because the lite client has decided to trust the header before). Now the goal is to check whether another header *newhead* can be trusted based on the data in *inithead*.

The correctness of the protocol is based on the assumption that *inithead* was generated by an instance of Tendermint consensus. The term "trusting" above indicates that the correctness on the protocol depends on this assumption. It is in the responsibility of the user that runs the lite client to make sure that the risk of trusting a corrupted/forged *inithead* is negligible.

## Definitions

### Data structures

In the following, I only give the details of the data structures needed for this specification.

  * header fields
    - *height*
    - *bfttime*: the chain time when the header (block) was generated
    - *V*: validator set containing validators.
    - *NextV*: validator set for next block.

>     - *commit*: evidence that block with height *height* - 1 was committed by a set of validators (canonical commit). We will use ```signers(commit)``` to refer to the set of validators that committed the block.

Author: In the specification we use the commit stored in a signed header returned by Commit(height). The commit h2.header.commit will be used for the specific checks of adjacent headers that are not describe in detail in this spec. These checks should be similar to the sequential case.

>     - *commit*: evidence that block with height *height* - 1 was committed by a set of validators (canonical commit). We will use ```signers(commit)``` to refer to the set of validators that committed the block.

Reviewer 4: So can we remove then the commit from the header or say it's for `height` and remove from `SignedHeader`?
The current datastructures are a bit confusing to me. 
In the TM current code the header includes only the first two fields from what you have there (`*height*` and `*bfttime*`). In addition it has a bunch of hashes for the validator sets and other info.
Then:
```go
type SignedHeader struct {
	*Header `json:"header"`
	Commit  *Commit `json:"commit"`
}
```
Not clear if `Commit` is filled by the "provider" with the canonical or seen commit. But it is definitely for the `Height` specified by `Header`.

```go
type FullCommit struct {
	SignedHeader   types.SignedHeader  `json:"signed_header"`
	Validators     *types.ValidatorSet `json:"validator_set"`
	NextValidators *types.ValidatorSet `json:"next_validator_set"`
}

type Provider interface {
...
	// LatestFullCommit returns the latest commit with minHeight <= height <= maxHeight.
	// If maxHeight is zero, returns the latest where minHeight <= height.
	LatestFullCommit(chainID string, minHeight, maxHeight int64) (FullCommit, error)
...
```
Given this what about using these structures in your specification (trying to keep the names you had before) if it makes sense. We can remove the vset hashes if we don't show any validations with them.
```go
type SignedHeader struct {
	height   int64   
	bfttime  time.Time
	VHash     []byte // vset hash for the current block
	nextVHash []byte // vset hash  for the next block 
        commit  Commit  // commit evidence for this height
}

type FullCommit struct {
	header  SignedHeader 
	V     ValidatorSet // vset for height
	NextV ValidatorSet // vset for height+1
}

// Commit returns a FullCommit
func Commit(height int64) (FullCommit, error)

```

>     - *commit*: evidence that block with height *height* - 1 was committed by a set of validators (canonical commit). We will use ```signers(commit)``` to refer to the set of validators that committed the block.

Author: In the Tendermint Core Dev meeting on Aug 19, we decided to stay with the current level of detail regarding the data structures.

Intuitively, a trusted validator set is assumed to only chose a new validator set that will obey the Tendermint Failure Model.

2. **Trusting period.** Based on a trusted block *h*, and the lite client
invariant, which ensures the fault assumption during the trusting period, we can check whether at least one  validator, that has been continuously correct from *h.Header.bfttime* until now, has signed *snh*.
If this is the case, similarly to above, the chosen validator set in *snh* does not violate the Tendermint Failure Model.

3. **Bisection.** If a check according to the trusting period fails, the lite client can try to obtain a header *hp* whose height lies between *h* and *snh* in order to check whether *h* can be used to get trust for *hp* and *hp* can be used to get trust for *snh*. If this is the case we can trust *snh*; if not, we may continue recursively.

## How to use it

We consider the following use case:
 the lite client wants to verify a header for some given height *k*. Thus:
  - it requests the signed header for height *k* from a full node
  - it tries to verify this header with the methods described here.

> This can be used in several settings

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This can be used in several settings:
```

  - someone tells the lite client that application data that is relevant for it can be read in the block of height *k*.
  - the lite clients wants the latest state. It asks a full nude for the current height, and uses the response for *k*.

## Details

*Assumptions*

1. *tp < unbonding period*.
2. *snh.Header.bfttime < now*
3. *snh.Header.bfttime < h.Header.bfttime+tp*
4. *trust(h)=true*

**Observation 1.** If *h.Header.bfttime + tp > now*, we trust the old
validator set *h.Header.NextV*.

> When we say we trust *h.Header.NextV* we do *not* trust that each individual validator in *h.Header.NextV* is correct, but we only trust the fact that at most 1/3 of them is faulty (more precisely, the faulty ones have less than 1/3 of the total voting power).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When we say we trust *h.Header.NextV* we do *not* trust that each individual validator in *h.Header.NextV* is correct, but we only trust the fact that at most 1/3 of them are faulty (more precisely, the faulty ones have less than 1/3 of the total voting power).
```

- the lite client must retry to retrieve correct headers from another full node
  * it picks a new full node
  * it restarts *Bisection*
  * there might be optimizations; a lite client may not need to call *Commit(k)*, for a height *k* for which it already has a signed header it trusts.

**Auxiliary Functions.** We will use the  function ```votingpower_in(V1,V2)``` to compute the voting power the validators in set V1 have according to their voting power in set V2;
 ```votingpower_in(V,V)``` returns the total voting power in V.
We further use the function ```signers(Commit)``` that returns the set of validators that signed the Commit.

**CheckSupport.** The following function checks whether we can trust the header h2 based on header h1 following the trusting period method.

```go
  func CheckSupport(h1,h2,trustlevel,trustlevel_adj) bool {
    if h1.Header.bfttime + tp < now { // Observation 1
      return false // old header was once trusted but it is expired
    }  

>     vp_all := votingpower_in(h1.Header.NextV,h1.Header.NextV)

Reviewer 2: Since it's a pseudo-code, wouldn't it be better to write smth like:

```suggestion
    vp_all := totalVotingPower(h1.Header.NextV)
```

?

Author: yes, makes sense. Thanks!

>       // total sum of voting power in h1

Reviewer 4: This is the total voting power for the validator set for h2. The comment is a bit misleading.

Author: You are right. Good catch! Thanks!

    if h2.Header.height == h1.Header.height + 1 {
      // specific check for adjacent headers; everything must be
      // properly signed.
      // also check that h2.Header.V == h1.Header.NextV
      // Plus the following check that 2/3 of the voting power
      // in h1 signed h2
      return (votingpower_in(signers(h2.Commit),h1.Header.NextV) >
              max(2/3,trustlevel_adj) * vp_all)
        // signing validators are more than two third in h1.
        // headers in Cosmos are typically signed by all validators, so one
        // may request that all signed (liveness might be endangered)
    }

    s := intersection(h1.Header.NextV,signers(h2.Commit))
      // get validators in h1 that signed h2
    vps := votingpower_in(s,h1.Header.NextV)
      // sum of voting powers in h1 of
      // validators that signed h2

>     return (vps > max(1/3,trustlevel) * vp_all)

Reviewer 4: I assume we do more verification here before we return true if `(vps > max(1/3,trustlevel) * vp_all)` holds.
Should still check signatures and more than 2/3rds signed, like in the sequential case. This could be done in the beginning for both cases.

Author: Yes. When we receive a header we should do all checks to verify that the header is "well-formed". Is there a list of checks that we do in the sequential case that I could point to?

Reviewer 4: https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/types/validator_set.go#L591-L633

There are other checks outside this when we receive the `FullCommit` but I think it would be enough if we add a comment that for both sequential and non-sequential cases we do the same basic verification.

Author: Thanks!

      // signing validators are more than a third in h1
  }
  ```  
  *Remark*: Basic header validation must be done for *h2*.

  *Remark*: There are some sanity checks which are not in the code:
  *h2.Header.height > h1.Header.height* and *h2.Header.bfttime > h1.Header.bfttime* and *h2.Header.bfttime < now*.

*Correctness arguments*

Towards Lite Client Accuracy:
- Assume by contradiction that *h2* was not generated correctly and the lite client sets trust to true because *CheckSupport* returns true.
- h1 is trusted and sufficiently new
- by Tendermint Fault Model, less than 1/3 of voting power held by faulty validators => at least one correct validator *v* has signed *h2*.
- as *v* is correct up to now, it followed the Tendermint consensus protocol at least up to signing *h2* => *h2* was correctly generated, we arrive at the required contradiction.

> 

Reviewer 4: I wish we had more clear definitions on the type of faults and what this client proposal must/should/may catch. We talk about "conflicts", "forged headers", "...not generated correctly", etc.
What happens if two different clients with same h1 are presented with two different headers h2 (fork). It is possible that they make inconsistent decisions and will each accept their version and continue (??). And the way to deal with this is outside the scope (fork accountability)?

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/pull/3840

Reviewer 4: Exactly what I was looking for, thanks!

Towards Lite Client Completeness:
- The check is successful if sufficiently many validators of *h1* are still validators in *h2* and signed *h2*.
- If *h2.Header.height = h1.Header.height + 1*, and both headers were generated correctly, the test passes

> *Assumption*: We may need a Tendermint invariant stating that if *h2.Header.height = h1.Header.height + 1* then *signers(h2.Commit) \subseteq h1.Header.NextV*.

Reviewer 2: Does this mean we should forbid changing validator set completely?

Author: No, this is just a remark to make explicit that the validators who sign h2 must be in h1.Header.NextV. This is enforced by Tendermint consensus. I just collect properties that are important to capture for automated verification. But I guess I should mark them differently to make this clear in the write-up.

}
```  

*Correctness arguments (sketch)*

Lite Client Accuracy:
- Assume by contradiction that *h2* was not generated correctly and the lite client sets trust to true because Bisection returns true.
- Bisection returns true only if all calls to CheckSupport in the recursion return true.
- Thus we have a sequence of headers that all satisfied the CheckSupport
- again a contradiction

Lite Client Completeness:

This is only ensured if upon *Commit(pivot)* the lite client is always provided with a correctly generated header.

*Stalling*

With Bisection, a faulty full node could stall a lite client by creating a long sequence of headers that are queried one-by-one by the lite client and look OK, before the lite client eventually detects a problem. There are two ways to address this:
* Each call to ```Commit``` could be issued to a different full node
* Instead of querying header by header, the lite client tells a full node which header it trusts, and the height of the header it needs. The full node responds with the header along with a proof consisting of intermediate headers that the light client can use to verify. Roughly, Bisection would then be executed at the full node.

> ### The case *h2.Header.height < h1.Header.height*

Reviewer 4: What is this section for? Could you add more comments/ explanations if it is used by the spec?

Author: I was thinking of a use case where the lite clients trusts a recent header but needs to verify an older one; someone told the user that there is useful information in the older block. In this case we need this method for verification. Does that make sense? I will add an explanation.

We iterate down the heights and check the hashes in each step.

```go
func Backwards(h1,h2) bool {
  assert (h2.Header.height < h1.Header.height)
  old := h1

>   for i := h1.Header.height - 1; h2.Header.height < i; i-- {

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  for i := h1.Header.height - 1; i > h2.Header.height; i-- {
```

```go
  func CheckSupport(h1,h2,trustlevel,trustlevel_adj) bool {
    if h1.Header.bfttime + tp < now { // Observation 1
      return false // old header was once trusted but it is expired
    }  
    vp_all := totalVotingPower(h1.Header.NextV)
      // total sum of voting power of validators in h2

    if h2.Header.height == h1.Header.height + 1 {
      // specific check for adjacent headers; everything must be
      // properly signed.
      // also check that h2.Header.V == h1.Header.NextV
      // Plus the following check that 2/3 of the voting power
      // in h1 signed h2
      return (votingpower_in(signers(h2.Commit),h1.Header.NextV) >
              max(2/3,trustlevel_adj) * vp_all)
        // signing validators are more than two third in h1.
        // headers in Cosmos are typically signed by all validators, so one
        // may request that all signed (liveness might be endangered)
    }

    s := intersection(h1.Header.NextV,signers(h2.Commit))
      // get validators in h1 that signed h2
    vps := votingpower_in(s,h1.Header.NextV)
      // sum of voting powers in h1 of
      // validators that signed h2

>     return (vps > max(1/3,trustlevel) * vp_all)

Reviewer 4: I feel like we are missing some explanations along the lines of the old ADR.

In theory the lite client should do:
1) get vps, the voting power of the intersection of V1 and V2 in V1
2) substract 1/3rd of total power of V1 (worst case where close to the 1/3rd of potentially faulty validators in V1 are part of the intersection) from vps, be that vps'
3) check vps' > 2/3rd of total power of V2 (guaranteed correct validators in V2 have more than 2/3rds)

The check in 3) fails most of the time, even for small validator set changes. Because of this we have relaxed the check in 3). 
Along these lines, I think trustlevel should be against V2 total power:
```suggestion
    return (vps - 1/3 * vp_all_v1 > trustlevel *vp_all_v2)
```

Author: There is a difference to the intersection mechanism in the old version. We do not do intersection and check for two thirds. We check whether at least one *correct* validator from header h1 signed h2. That a correct validator exists, we check by requiring more than 1/3 of the old validators signing h2.

So we rely on the fact that a correct validator only signs "correct" blocks/headers, and that header h2 is well-formed, that is, all the checks are successful.

Reviewer 4: Yes, I am just saying that we should add the justification for the difference.

Author: OK. I added a comment on the old method and why we have chosen the new one.

# Lite client

A lite client is a process that connects to Tendermint full nodes and then tries to verify application data using the Merkle proofs.

## Context of this document

In order to make sure that full nodes have the incentive to follow the protocol, we have to address the following three Issues

1) The lite clients needs a method to verify header it obtains from full nodes -- addressed in this document)

> 2) Detect conflicts/forged headers -- when the verification method of this document fails, then a conflict is detected. However, this document does not address to do this in an efficient way, or with special attacks in mind. This will be treated in fork accountability.

Reviewer 5: 2) The lite client must be able to connect to one correct full node to detect and report on failures in the trust assumptions (ie. conflicting headers) -- a future document.

Author: I incorporated the suggested text. I am not sure whether the addition was intended that way. Please check!

> 3) How can evidence for conflicts be reported, and to whom. This will be treated in a future specification.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
3) In the event the trust assumption fails (ie. a lite client is fooled by a conflicting header), the Tendermint fork accountability protocol must account for the evidence -- see #3840 
```

We further use the function ```signers(Commit)``` that returns the set of validators that signed the Commit.

**CheckSupport.** The following function checks whether we can trust the header h2 based on header h1 following the trusting period method.

```go
  func CheckSupport(h1,h2,trustlevel,trustlevel_adj) bool {
    if h1.Header.bfttime + tp < now { // Observation 1
      return false // old header was once trusted but it is expired
    }  
    vp_all := totalVotingPower(h1.Header.NextV)
      // total sum of voting power of validators in h2

    if h2.Header.height == h1.Header.height + 1 {
      // specific check for adjacent headers; everything must be
      // properly signed.
      // also check that h2.Header.V == h1.Header.NextV
      // Plus the following check that 2/3 of the voting power
      // in h1 signed h2
      return (votingpower_in(signers(h2.Commit),h1.Header.NextV) >
              max(2/3,trustlevel_adj) * vp_all)
        // signing validators are more than two third in h1.
        // headers in Cosmos are typically signed by all validators, so one
        // may request that all signed (liveness might be endangered)
    }

>     s := intersection(h1.Header.NextV,signers(h2.Commit))

Author: yes. I will change that.

  *Remark*: There are some sanity checks which are not in the code:
  *h2.Header.height > h1.Header.height* and *h2.Header.bfttime > h1.Header.bfttime* and *h2.Header.bfttime < now*.

*Correctness arguments*

Towards Lite Client Accuracy:
- Assume by contradiction that *h2* was not generated correctly and the lite client sets trust to true because *CheckSupport* returns true.
- h1 is trusted and sufficiently new
- by Tendermint Fault Model, less than 1/3 of voting power held by faulty validators => at least one correct validator *v* has signed *h2*.
- as *v* is correct up to now, it followed the Tendermint consensus protocol at least up to signing *h2* => *h2* was correctly generated, we arrive at the required contradiction.

Towards Lite Client Completeness:
- The check is successful if sufficiently many validators of *h1* are still validators in *h2* and signed *h2*.
- If *h2.Header.height = h1.Header.height + 1*, and both headers were generated correctly, the test passes

*Verification Condition:* We may need a Tendermint invariant stating that if *h2.Header.height = h1.Header.height + 1* then *signers(h2.Commit) \subseteq h1.Header.NextV*.

> *Remark*: The variable *trustlevel* can be used if we believe that relying on one correct validator is not sufficient. However, in case of (frequent) changes in the validator set, the higher the *trustlevel* is chosen, the more unlikely it becomes that CheckSupport returns true for non-adjacent headers.

Reviewer 2: > f we believe that relying on one correct validator is not sufficient

who are we here? if relying on one correct validator is enough from security standpoint, then we don't need `trustlevel`

Author: I tried to clarify that "we" is the user in the new revision...

Reviewer 2: > Does that make sense?

Makes sense, thanks!

    // the CheckSupport)
    // we could submit evidence here
    return false
  }
  pivot := (h1.Header.height + h2.Header.height) / 2
  hp := Commit(pivot)
    // ask a full node for header of height pivot
  Store(hp)  
    // store header hp locally
  return (Bisection(h1,hp,trustlevel,trustlevel_adj) &&
          Bisection(hp,h2,trustlevel,trustlevel_adj))
}
```  

*Correctness arguments (sketch)*

Lite Client Accuracy:
- Assume by contradiction that *h2* was not generated correctly and the lite client sets trust to true because Bisection returns true.
- Bisection returns true only if all calls to CheckSupport in the recursion return true.
- Thus we have a sequence of headers that all satisfied the CheckSupport
- again a contradiction

Lite Client Completeness:

This is only ensured if upon *Commit(pivot)* the lite client is always provided with a correctly generated header.

*Stalling*

With Bisection, a faulty full node could stall a lite client by creating a long sequence of headers that are queried one-by-one by the lite client and look OK, before the lite client eventually detects a problem. There are two ways to address this:

> * Each call to ```Commit``` could be issued to a different full node

Reviewer 2: as an alternative: can we set a time limit for how long the bisection can take?

Author: I added timeout as another way of how we can address the problem.
